[DCP] Add Distributed Checkpoint tutorial (#2565)
pytorch/tutorials: intermediate_source/DCP_tutorial.rst

Getting Started with Distributed Checkpoint (DCP)
=====================================================

**Author**: `Iris Zhang <https://github.com/wz337>`__, `Rodrigo Kumpera <https://github.com/kumpera>`__, `Chien-Chin Huang <https://github.com/fegin>`__

.. note::
   |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/intermediate_source/DCP_tutorial.rst>`__.

> Checkpointing AI models during distributed training could be challenging, as parameters and gradients are partitioned across GPUs and the number of GPUs available could change when resume training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checkpointing AI models during distributed training could be challenging, as parameters and gradients are partitioned across GPUs and the number of GPUs available could change when you resume training.
```

> Pytorch Distributed Checkpointing (DCP) can help make this easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pytorch Distributed Checkpointing (DCP) can help make this process easier.
```

In this tutorial, we show how to use DCP APIs with a simple FSDP wrapped model.

How DCP works
--------------

> torch.distributed.checkpoint enables saving and loading models from multiple ranks in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:func:`torch.distributed.checkpoint` enables saving and loading models from multiple ranks in parallel.
```
you should be able to use [intersphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html) here to point to the related sections in pytorch docs.

In addition, checkpointing automatically handles fully-qualified-name (FQN) mappings across models and optimizers, enabling load-time resharding across differing cluster topologies.

> DCP is different than torch.save and torch.load in a few significant ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DCP is different from :func:`torch.save` and :func:`torch.load` in a few significant ways:
```

* It produces multiple files per checkpoint, with at least one per rank.
* It operates in place, meaning that the model should allocate its data first and DCP uses that storage instead.

How to use DCP
--------------

> Here we use a toy model wrapped with FSDP for demonstration purposes. Similarly the APIs and logic can be applied to larger models for checkpointing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we use a toy model wrapped with FSDP for demonstration purposes. Similarly, the APIs and logic can be applied to larger models for checkpointing.
```

> *Save*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Saving
~~~~~~
```

        setup(rank, world_size)

        # create a model and move it to GPU with id rank
        model = ToyModel().to(rank)
        model = FSDP(model)

        loss_fn = nn.MSELoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.1)

        optimizer.zero_grad()
        model(torch.rand(8, 16, device="cuda")).sum().backward()
        optimizer.step()

        # set FSDP StateDictType to SHARDED_STATE_DICT so we can use DCP to checkpoint sharded model state dict
        FSDP.set_state_dict_type(
            model,
            StateDictType.SHARDED_STATE_DICT,
        )
        state_dict = {
            "model": model.state_dict(),
        }

        DCP.save_state_dict(
            state_dict=state_dict,
            storage_writer=DCP.FileSystemWriter(CHECKPOINT_DIR),
        )

        cleanup()

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        world_size = torch.cuda.device_count()
        print(f"Running fsdp checkpoint example on {world_size} devices.")
        mp.spawn(
            run_fsdp_checkpoint_save_example,
            args=(world_size,),
            nprocs=world_size,
            join=True,
        )

> *Load*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading
~~~~~~~
```

> After saving, let’s create the same FSDP wrapped model, and load the saved state dict from storage into the model. You can load in the same world size or different world size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After saving, let’s create the same FSDP-wrapped model, and load the saved state dict from storage into the model. You can load in the same world size or different world size.
```

        dist.init_process_group("nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size)
        torch.cuda.set_device(rank)

    def cleanup():
        dist.destroy_process_group()

    def run_fsdp_checkpoint_load_example(rank, world_size):
        print(f"Running basic FSDP checkpoint loading example on rank {rank}.")
        setup(rank, world_size)

        # create a model and move it to GPU with id rank
        model = ToyModel().to(rank)
        model = FSDP(model)

        FSDP.set_state_dict_type(
            model,
            StateDictType.SHARDED_STATE_DICT,
        )
        state_dict = {
            "model": model.state_dict(),
        }

        DCP.load_state_dict(
            state_dict=state_dict,
            storage_reader=DCP.FileSystemReader(CHECKPOINT_DIR),
        )
        model.load_state_dict(state_dict["model"])

        cleanup()

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        world_size = torch.cuda.device_count()
        print(f"Running fsdp checkpoint example on {world_size} devices.")
        mp.spawn(
            run_fsdp_checkpoint_load_example,
            args=(world_size,),
            nprocs=world_size,
            join=True,
        )

> If you would like to load the saved checkpoint into a non-FSDP wrapped model in a non distributed setup, perhaps for inference, you can also do that with DCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to load the saved checkpoint into a non-FSDP wrapped model in a non-distributed setup, perhaps for inference, you can also do that with DCP.
```

> By default, DCP saves and loads a distributed state_dict in Single Program Multiple Data(SPMD) style. To load without a distributed setup, please set ``no_dist`` to ``True`` when loading with DCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, DCP saves and loads a distributed ``state_dict`` in Single Program Multiple Data(SPMD) style. To load without a distributed setup, please set ``no_dist`` to ``True`` when loading with DCP.
```

.. code-block:: python
    import os

    import torch
    import torch.distributed.checkpoint as DCP
    import torch.nn as nn

    CHECKPOINT_DIR = "checkpoint"

    class ToyModel(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self):
            super(ToyModel, self).__init__()
            self.net1 = nn.Linear(16, 16)
            self.relu = nn.ReLU()
            self.net2 = nn.Linear(16, 8)

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.net2(self.relu(self.net1(x)))

    def run_checkpoint_load_example():
        # create the non FSDP-wrapped toy model
        model = ToyModel()
        state_dict = {
            "model": model.state_dict(),
        }

        # turn no_dist to be true to load in non-distributed setting
        DCP.load_state_dict(
            state_dict=state_dict,
            storage_reader=DCP.FileSystemReader(CHECKPOINT_DIR),
            no_dist=True,
        )
        model.load_state_dict(state_dict["model"])

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        print(f"Running basic DCP checkpoint loading example.")

>         run_checkpoint_load_example()

Reviewer: Add a Conclusion section. 

Conclusion
--------------

In this tutorial, we have learned .....
For more information, see the following: 
* Link1
* Link2
* LInk3

Getting Started with Distributed Checkpoint (DCP)
=====================================================

**Author**: `Iris Zhang <https://github.com/wz337>`__, `Rodrigo Kumpera <https://github.com/kumpera>`__, `Chien-Chin Huang <https://github.com/fegin>`__

.. note::
   |edit| View and edit this tutorial in `github <https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/blob/main/intermediate_source/DCP_tutorial.rst>`__.

> Checkpointing AI models during distributed training could be challenging, as parameters and gradients are partitioned across GPUs and the number of GPUs available could change when you resume training.

Reviewer 2: Should we change GPUs to trainers? Users may not necessarily use GPUs but still need DCP.

Pytorch Distributed Checkpointing (DCP) can help make this process easier.

In this tutorial, we show how to use DCP APIs with a simple FSDP wrapped model.

How DCP works
--------------

:func:`torch.distributed.checkpoint` enables saving and loading models from multiple ranks in parallel.
In addition, checkpointing automatically handles fully-qualified-name (FQN) mappings across models and optimizers, enabling load-time resharding across differing cluster topologies.

DCP is different from :func:`torch.save` and :func:`torch.load` in a few significant ways:
* It produces multiple files per checkpoint, with at least one per rank.

> * It operates in place, meaning that the model should allocate its data first and DCP uses that storage instead.

Reviewer 3: Those two points are quite important and it's worth repeating them once again during the tutorial.

We should add some comments in the load code about the in-place aspect and how different it is from torch.load.

For the multiple files, after saving, we should encourage the reader to look at the generated files and show a screenshot / screen dump listing all the files.

            self.net1 = nn.Linear(16, 16)
            self.relu = nn.ReLU()
            self.net2 = nn.Linear(16, 8)

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.net2(self.relu(self.net1(x)))

    def setup(rank, world_size):
        os.environ["MASTER_ADDR"] = "localhost"
        os.environ["MASTER_PORT"] = "12355 "

        # initialize the process group
        dist.init_process_group("nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size)
        torch.cuda.set_device(rank)

    def cleanup():
        dist.destroy_process_group()

    def run_fsdp_checkpoint_save_example(rank, world_size):
        print(f"Running basic FSDP checkpoint saving example on rank {rank}.")
        setup(rank, world_size)

        # create a model and move it to GPU with id rank
        model = ToyModel().to(rank)
        model = FSDP(model)

        loss_fn = nn.MSELoss()
        optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.1)

        optimizer.zero_grad()
        model(torch.rand(8, 16, device="cuda")).sum().backward()
        optimizer.step()

        # set FSDP StateDictType to SHARDED_STATE_DICT so we can use DCP to checkpoint sharded model state dict

>         FSDP.set_state_dict_type(

Reviewer 3: Did we settle down on this approach instead of using a context manager?

Reviewer 2: No actually, some users still use context manager because they want to use different state_dict_type for model and optimizer.

            model,

>             StateDictType.SHARDED_STATE_DICT,

Reviewer 2: It worths to mention that StateDictType.LOCAL_STATE_DICT is not compatible with FSDP.

        )
        state_dict = {
            "model": model.state_dict(),
        }

        DCP.save_state_dict(
            state_dict=state_dict,
            storage_writer=DCP.FileSystemWriter(CHECKPOINT_DIR),
        )

        cleanup()

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        world_size = torch.cuda.device_count()
        print(f"Running fsdp checkpoint example on {world_size} devices.")

>         mp.spawn(

Reviewer 3: Should we switch the tutorial to use torchrun instead of launching it manually?

Author: > Should we switch the tutorial to use torchrun instead of launching it manually?

We can add torchrun as an option, but since all the FSDP and DDP examples are using manual launch, so just want to include this as well.

    from torch.distributed.fsdp.fully_sharded_data_parallel import StateDictType

    CHECKPOINT_DIR = "checkpoint"

    class ToyModel(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self):
            super(ToyModel, self).__init__()
            self.net1 = nn.Linear(16, 16)
            self.relu = nn.ReLU()
            self.net2 = nn.Linear(16, 8)

        def forward(self, x):
            return self.net2(self.relu(self.net1(x)))

    def setup(rank, world_size):
        os.environ["MASTER_ADDR"] = "localhost"
        os.environ["MASTER_PORT"] = "12355 "

        # initialize the process group
        dist.init_process_group("nccl", rank=rank, world_size=world_size)
        torch.cuda.set_device(rank)

    def cleanup():
        dist.destroy_process_group()

    def run_fsdp_checkpoint_load_example(rank, world_size):
        print(f"Running basic FSDP checkpoint loading example on rank {rank}.")
        setup(rank, world_size)

        # create a model and move it to GPU with id rank
        model = ToyModel().to(rank)
        model = FSDP(model)

        FSDP.set_state_dict_type(
            model,
            StateDictType.SHARDED_STATE_DICT,
        )
        state_dict = {

>             "model": model.state_dict(),

Reviewer 2: It worths to mention that we need to call `state_dict`. This is implicitly mentioned when comparing with `torch.save` and `torch.load`. We should be more explicitly mentioned that `state_dict` provide 1.) pre-allocated storage, 2.) sharding information to allow resharding.

        }

        DCP.load_state_dict(
            state_dict=state_dict,
            storage_reader=DCP.FileSystemReader(CHECKPOINT_DIR),
        )
        model.load_state_dict(state_dict["model"])

        cleanup()

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        world_size = torch.cuda.device_count()
        print(f"Running fsdp checkpoint example on {world_size} devices.")
        mp.spawn(
            run_fsdp_checkpoint_load_example,
            args=(world_size,),
            nprocs=world_size,
            join=True,
        )

If you would like to load the saved checkpoint into a non-FSDP wrapped model in a non-distributed setup, perhaps for inference, you can also do that with DCP.

> By default, DCP saves and loads a distributed ``state_dict`` in Single Program Multiple Data(SPMD) style. To load without a distributed setup, please set ``no_dist`` to ``True`` when loading with DCP.

Reviewer 2: How about MPMD like pipeline parallelism? I don't think we need to call ``no_dist``.  We need to be more clear about the MPMD part or at least mention it is under development, not yet verified.
